.Dd December 17, 2022
.Dt WIS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wis
.Nd Bulk WHOIS Search
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 1|--first
.Op Fl c|--case
.Op Fl d|--dirname Ar DIR
.Op Fl e|--exclude Ar FILE
.Op Fl f|--filename Ar FILE
.Op Fl i|--inet4
.Op Fl I|--inet6
.Op Fl r|--range
.Op Fl s|--summary
.Op Fl S|--summaryonly
.Op Fl -debug
.Op Fl -help|-?
.Op Fl -version
.Op Fl -
.Op Ar KEYWORD
.Op Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility searches for keyword(s) within bulk WHOIS database(s).
.Pp
Beside saving multiple WHOIS queries, using pre-downloaded bulk WHOIS databases enables to do plain text searches on all the WHOIS records.
.Pp
You can either select one specific database (in plain text or gzipped format) using the
.Fl f|--filename Ar FILE
option, or/and a directory containing all your databases using the
.Fl d|--dirname Ar DIR
option.
.Pp
Use the
.Fl c|--case
option to make your searches case sensitive.
.Pp
Use the
.Fl e|--exclude Ar FILE
option to provide a one-excluded-case-insensitive-keyword-per-line file to filter out matching records.
You'll then obtain a list of records matching at least one of your keywords, and not matching any of the excluded keywords.
.Pp
If you use the
.Fl 1|--first
option, you'll instead only obtain the first line of each matching record.
.Pp
If you use the
.Fl i|--inet4
and/or
.Fl I|--inet6
option(s), you'll instead obtain only matching inetnum or inet6num records reformatted as a pipe-separated-values of networks:
.Bd -literal
starting IP address|ending IP Address|netname|descr|org|country
.Ed
If you add the
.Fl r|--range
option to the last ones, you'll instead obtain only matching inetnum or inet6num records reformatted as a pipe-separated-values of hosts:
.Bd -literal
IP address|type|subnet|netname|descr|org|country
.Ed
Where type is either "Network" for the first address in a subnet, "Broadcast" for the last address in a subnet or "IP address" for the rest.
.Pp
If you use the
.Fl s|--summary
option, you'll get a summary of the record types found (from the first line of each matching record, before the colon).
.Pp
If you use the
.Fl S|--summaryonly
option you'll only get that.
.Pp
.Ss OPTIONS
.Op Fl 1|--first
Show only the first line of each matching record
.Pp
.Op Fl c|--case
Make searches case sensitive
.Pp
.Op Fl d|--dirname Ar DIR
Use databases from the DIR directory name
.Pp
.Op Fl e|--exclude Ar FILE
Exclude words from the FILE file name
.Pp
.Op Fl f|--filename Ar FILE
Use database from the FILE file name
.Pp
.Op Fl i|--inet4
Show only reformatted inetnum records
.Pp
.Op Fl I|--inet6
Show only reformatted inet6num records
.Pp
.Op Fl r|--range
Show expanded inet(6)num ranges
.Pp
.Op Fl s|--summary
Show a summary of the type of matching records
.Pp
.Op Fl S|--summaryonly
Show only a summary of the type of matching records
.Pp
.Op Fl -debug
Enable debug mode
.Pp
.Op Fl -help|-?
Print usage and this help message and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl -version
Print version and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl -
Options processing terminator
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The
.Ev WIS_DEBUG
environment variable can also be set to any value to enable debug mode.
.Sh FILES
The
.Nm
utility uses bulk WHOIS databases downloaded from the main Regional Internet Registries (RIR) and National Internet Registries (NIR).
.Pp
The provided
.Pa fetch-db-WHOIS.sh
script can be used for doing this.
.Pp
You can also use bulk RR (Routing Registries) databases, that you can download with the provided
.Pa fetch-db-RR.sh
script.
.Pp
Be sure to read the databases respective terms of use before!
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std COMMAND
.Sh EXAMPLES
Assuming that you have installed the available bulk WHOIS databases (in gzipped format) in a directory named
.Pa db ,
and that you made a one-excluded-keyword-per-line file named
.Pa excluded.txt ,
use the following commands:
.Bl -bullet
.It
to extract full WHOIS information about matching blocks:
.Bd -literal
wis -d db -e excluded.txt keyword1 keyword2 keyword3
.Ed
.It
to extract only the first line of WHOIS information about matching blocks:
.Bd -literal
wis -d db -e excluded.txt -1 keyword1 keyword2 keyword3
.Ed
.It
to extract an IPv4 network summary about matching blocks:
.Bd -literal
wis -d db -e excluded.txt -i keyword1 keyword2 keyword3
.Ed
.It
to extract an IPv4 host summary about matching blocks:
.Bd -literal
wis -d db -e excluded.txt -ir keyword1 keyword2 keyword3
.Ed
.It
to analyze a database record types:
.Bd -literal
wis -f database_name.db.gz -S 
.Ed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr whois 1
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
utility is not a standard UNIX command.
.Pp
This implementation tries to follow the PEP 8 style guide for Python code.
.Sh PORTABILITY
To be tested under Windows.
.Sh HISTORY
This implementation was made for the
.Lk https://github.com/HubTou/PNU PNU project
.Pp
Its first use case was to identify all my company's IP addresses ranges through the world, helping to secure our networks and identify shadow IT...
.Pp
The initial name of the command was "AS Search", but the resulting short form seemed problematic... So I went for a
.Em wis -er
name :-)
.Sh LICENSE
It is available under the 3-clause BSD license.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Hubert Tournier
.Sh CAVEATS
Only the AFRINIC, RIPE, APNIC, APNIC/JPNIC, APNIC/TWNIC and APNIC/KISA databases have useful
.Em domain ,
.Em inetnum ,
.Em inet6num
and
.Em organisation
information.
.Pp
LACNIC does not provide useful
.Em inetnum
and
.Em inet6num
information.
.Pp
ARIN, APNIC/IDNIC, APNIC/CNNIC, APNIC/VNNIC and APNIC/IRINN do not provide
.Em domain ,
.Em inetnum ,
.Em inet6num
and
.Em organisation
information at all.
.Pp
However you can find
.Em route
information from all of them, which can then be used with regular WHOIS queries.
